# The a2 Milk Company

"We would like to think we are demonstrating a unique business model and strategy."  
—Geoffrey Babidge, CEO of The a2 Milk Company (2017)

On February 23, 2018, two days after The a2 Milk Company (a2MC) announced a new "strategic relationship" with Fonterra Co-operative Group, it became the most valuable company on the New Zealand Stock Exchange. Over the past year, its market value had rocketed from NZ$2 to NZ$10 billion (See Exhibit 1). a2MC was a dairy processing firm with sales of NZ$728 million in calendar 2017. It sold both drinking milk and infant formula primarily in China and Australia. What distinguished a2MC from other dairy processing firms was that it sold products containing the A2 beta-casein protein only, not the A1 protein that most cows produced (i.e., its products were A1-free, see Exhibit 2). Eliminating the A1 protein from products was significant because many people found it difficult to digest the A1 protein, and research suggested it could be related to health problems such as diabetes and heart disease.

The new partner, New Zealand-based Fonterra, was the world’s sixth-largest dairy processor with sales of NZ$19 billion in 2017. It was a farmer-owned cooperative that produced and sold dairy products globally but did not produce any A1-free products. According to Fonterra, the partnership would "fast-track market growth" by combining Fonterra’s sales and distribution expertise with a2MC’s brand strength. An industry blogger described the move as a "seismic shift for both the New Zealand and global dairy industries" that was driven by the realization that continuing to "fight against the A2 cause was a losing stance." Investors responded enthusiastically to the news: a2MC’s stock price surged 27% that day. Several senior executives took this opportunity to sell shares; in particular, Babidge sold 1.5 million a2MC shares for NZ$19.7 million, leaving him with 2.5 million shares.

But one month later, Nestlé, the world’s largest dairy firm, confirmed it had launched its own A1-free infant formula in China. Although Babidge claimed Nestlé’s move was a "very strong endorsement" of the A2 proposition and that competition would help build the category, the company’s stock fell 10% within two days to close at NZ$12.40. In the short run, Babidge had to decide how to respond to Nestlé’s entry into the market; in the longer term, he had to decide how to position the firm for long-term growth and success. These decisions were complicated by the fact that he was scheduled to retire in July and would be replaced by Jayne Hrdlicka, an American who had run Jetstar (a low-cost Australian airline owned by Qantas), served as a non-executive director of Woolworths (Australia’s largest supermarket chain), worked at Bain & Company, and graduated from the Tuck Business School. Hrdlicka said she was delighted to join a "strong and principled firm with significant opportunity ahead and impressive momentum in each of its core markets." She did, however, try to allay some potential concerns: "Going from aviation to dairy is not an obvious transition, but it is actually a pretty logical one when you step back from it. I’ve spent six years in a very disruptive segment of aviation, a business that had grown like crazy and taking it to another level of its infrastructure and capability and doing that through a very clear lens on Asia."

## Dairy Products and the A2 Discovery

At a high level, the global beverage industry had two major segments: alcoholic (e.g., beer, wine, and spirits) and non-alcoholic beverages. The latter could be further divided into beverages that were typically consumed hot, such as coffee and tea, and those that were typically consumed cold, such as water, carbonated soft drinks, fruit juices, sports drinks, and milk. Relative to other beverages, people drank milk when they were thirsty, wanted the nutritional benefits (e.g., calcium, vitamin D, and protein), or liked the taste.

The primary ingredient in drinking milk was raw cow’s milk, which could also be used to make a variety of dairy products (e.g., butter and cheese). Because raw milk was highly perishable, processors removed the water to make milk powders that had a much longer shelf life and approximately 10% of the weight. In powder form, it was easier and cheaper to ship long distances; approximately one-third of Australian dairy products were subsequently exported. One of the major uses for milk powders was infant formula. After the powder could be rehydrated and used as a substitute for or an alternative to human breast milk.

Annual per capita consumption of drinking milk ranged from a low of 20 liters in China to a high of 135 liters in Ireland. Australia and New Zealand were near the upper end of per capita consumption with just over 100 liters each (Exhibit 3a shows per capita consumption; Exhibit 3b shows the size of the global dairy industry and the major segments). While consumption patterns differed across countries, per capita milk consumption was declining in many countries. In the U.S., for example, it had declined about 1% per year for the past 70 years. One reason for the decline was that many people had trouble digesting milk—it caused bloating, gas, and diarrhea. The cause for some people was lactose intolerance: they did not produce enough of the chemical needed to digest lactose, the natural sugar found in all mammalian milk. This condition was more prevalent in older people and less common among children and in certain ethnic groups: approximately 20% of Caucasian, 70% of African, and 90% of Asian adults had trouble digesting milk. But many people who had trouble digesting milk were not technically lactose intolerant by medical standards. According to one survey, 25% of American adults (85 million people) felt discomfort after consuming dairy products when, in fact, only 5% were actually lactose intolerant. Among those who felt discomfort, a majority of them did not drink milk. As a result, there was a large segment of the world’s population that either did not drink milk or did so with discomfort.

Besides lactose intolerance, an alternative hypothesis for why people had trouble digesting milk had to do with its chemical composition. In the 1960s, biochemists discovered that cows, even from the same breed, naturally produced different kinds of beta-casein proteins. Ten thousand years ago, all cows produced the A2 protein only, but genetic mutations had caused some cows to produce a variant called A1 (see Exhibit 4). All cows had two alleles (i.e., two types of genes), and milk production was determined by which alleles the cow possessed. If a cow had the A1 allele, its milk contained the A1 protein. 70% of cows produced some version of the A1 protein (either pure A1/A1 or a combination of A1/A2 proteins). The difference between the A1 and A2 proteins involved a single amino acid in a chain of more than 209 amino acids (see Exhibit 5). In 1993, two New Zealand scientists, Bob Elliott and Corran McLachlan, discovered that humans digested the A1 and A2 proteins differently. A protein fragment called BCM-7, a type of opioid, broke off during the digestion of milk containing the A1 protein, causing inflammation in the digestive system. Scientists suspected the inflammation caused the discomfort many people experienced after consuming dairy products and could be related to more serious illnesses ranging from diabetes and autism to heart disease and allergies.

Since that time, scientists had been trying to prove whether the A1 protein did, indeed, cause discomfort and other health problems. Some of the early studies were rejected because they were done on animals, not humans. Another early study was disputed because it was done by a consultant to Fonterra, a conventional dairy firm. Fonterra scientists regularly rejected the health claims made about the A1 protein, saying they were "irresponsible" and lacked "compelling evidence." In 2014, a2MC sponsored a test on humans that showed people reported less pain after consuming A1-free milk. Although it was published in a reputable nutrition journal, people questioned the results, describing A1-free milk as just a "marketing concept." The following year, a2MC sponsored another study involving 600 Chinese adults. It, too, prompted the New Zealand government to conclude:

> The A1/A2 hypothesis is both intriguing and potentially very important for population health if it is proved correct. It should be taken seriously, and further research is needed. As a matter of choice, people may wish to reduce or remove A1 beta-casein from their diet, [but] they should do so knowing that there is substantial uncertainty about the benefits of such an approach.

Despite the uncertainty, many people drank a2 Milk® and swore by it. a2MC ran testimonials on its website with claims like this one from a woman named Lisa: "I suffer from an upset stomach after drinking regular milk. Now I have none of these symptoms, thanks to a2 Milk®."

The demand for dairy products in general, combined with the large fraction of the population that had trouble digesting milk, had created demand for two new kinds of milk. The first kind was "specialty milks," which included A2 cow milk, goat milk (which contained the A2 protein only), and lactose-free milk. This segment accounted for 5% of the milk market and was the fastest-growing segment. Because all milk contained lactose, A1-free milk did not help people with lactose intolerance, but it did help many people with digestion problems, and it tasted like conventional milk. In contrast, both lactose-free and goat milk tasted considerably different from regular cow’s milk. The second kind of milk was plant-based, which represented 10% of the milk market. But these plant-based alternatives also tasted considerably different from regular cow’s milk.

Health concerns also created demand for organic milk (~5% of the market). Whereas organic milk required a different kind of process, producing A1-free milk required exactly the same process as conventional milk once you created a herd of pure A2/A2 cows. The conversion process, however, took time and incremental cost. Given breeding cycles, herd conversion could take up to 10 years, but the timeline could be reduced to five or so years by using pure A2 bull semen for artificial insemination, by testing and removing calves with the A1 gene, and by breeding cows at younger ages. While many firms around the world provided A2 bull semen, the leading suppliers in New Zealand and Australia tested all of their bulls for the A2 gene—the genetic test cost NZ$23 per animal—and offered A2 semen at no additional cost. The cost of pure A2 semen was NZ$25 per straw (one straw was required to fertilize a cow), and a healthy bull could produce enough semen to create tens of thousands of straws per year.

## The Australian Dairy Industry

The production and sale of dairy products consisted of three stages: farming, milk processing, and retail distribution. With a few minor exceptions, the Australian and New Zealand dairy industries were quite similar. Because the Australian operations grew increasingly important to a2MC over time and it was a bigger market, this section focuses primarily on the Australian dairy industry.

The production process began on one of Australia’s 5,800 dairy farms, where 1.5 million cows produced 9 billion liters of milk worth A$3.7 billion. Farming was a difficult business that generated both low and volatile margins: the average pretax return on capital for Australian dairy farms was 2.2% since 2000 (not counting land appreciation). Larger farms generated higher returns, in part because they received higher milk prices from processors—as much as 15% higher—because it was easier and cheaper for processors to source milk from a single, large farm than from many smaller farms.

After cows were milked, the raw milk was then transported to facilities where it was processed into drinking milk, butter, cheese, and powders (both adult powders and infant formula). Most farmers sold their milk under contract to a local processor. In the typical market, three processors handled 85% of the volume. Following deregulation of the industry in 2000, the number of processing firms had shrunk through acquisitions to the point where the "Big 6" firms currently controlled 95% of Australian dairy production; a handful of small processors did the rest. The largest processor, Murray Goulburn, had 40% of the market and had just been acquired by Saputo, a Canadian firm. Large foreign firms owned two of the other Big 6 producers (Parmalat and Lion Dairy & Drinks), as well. Fonterra was by far the largest processor in New Zealand, and its Australian subsidiary was one of the Big 6.

While some processors produced a full range of dairy products, others specialized in one or two products. For example, Bega focused on cheese, and Synlait focused on milk powders. Similarly, some processors created their own branded milk products—Fonterra had the Anchor brand, while Murray Goulburn had the Devondale brand—while others made private-label brands for supermarkets or dairy goods. Besides milk, processors used machinery, labor, and packaging (cartons and containers) to produce finished dairy products, all of which were available in competitive markets. The cost of a new processing facility, the most expensive input, ranged from A$20 to A$80 million, depending on the facility’s size, throughput, and product range. Because processing was a competitive business with high raw material costs, it generated relatively low gross margins and low returns on capital. Exhibit 6 shows profit and balance sheet information for the publicly owned dairy processing firms in Australia and New Zealand.

Although branded dairy products might signal safety or higher quality, consumers were unable to distinguish different types of milk based on taste. For example, Choice, an Australian consumer advocacy group, ran a blind taste test that showed there was no taste difference between generic milk and branded milk costing twice as much. Despite the difference in retail prices, farmers received approximately the same price for raw milk regardless of what final product it produced. Processors typically announced "farmgate" prices—the average expected price for the year—in June and then made minor adjustments over the coming year. They set milk prices as low as possible to acquire the milk volume needed in each region. Farmers rarely knew the contractual terms or the actual prices paid by processors to buy milk from other farmers.

After production and packaging, dairy products were sent to retailers for sale to consumers. Supermarkets, the largest distribution channel for dairy products in general and for milk in particular, bought milk from regional processors under medium- to long-term contracts. Supermarkets were also the major sellers of infant formula, though other retailers, such as chemists (pharmacies), sold infant formula as well. The two largest supermarket chains, Coles and Woolworths, controlled 70% of the food market in Australia; two smaller chains, Aldi and IGA, controlled another 23%. The second-largest distribution channel for dairy products was convenience stores, a channel dominated by chains such as Coles Express, Woolworths Plus Petrol, and 7-Eleven.

Because consumers remembered the prices of only a few food items, and milk was one of them, supermarkets priced milk aggressively, even at a loss, to generate store traffic. Price competition also resulted from the fact that private-label milk made up over 50% of the Australian milk market. One of the grocery industry’s most memorable events occurred on Australia Day (national day) in 2011, when Coles cut the price of its private-label milk by 33% to A$1 per liter. The other major supermarkets immediately matched the price, and that price had remained in effect through 2018. Although Coles promised it would absorb the price cut itself, a farming trade organization claimed, "Lower prices have pushed right through the system: Processors have no alternative but to pay lower prices to farmers." In fact, Murray Goulburn, the leading supplier of milk to Coles, cut its farmgate price by 15%. For many farmers, this new price was below their total cost but not their marginal cost of production.

Despite intense competition at the retail level, supermarkets generated operating margins of 4% and pretax returns on capital of 10%. Within the dairy category, they generated gross margins of 12% on private-label milk, 28% on branded milk, 30% on milk powders, and up to 35% on infant formula.

## The a2 Milk Company

Dr. Corran McLachlan, one of the scientists who had conducted the early research on the A2 protein, and Howard Paterson, a wealthy New Zealand entrepreneur and farmer, founded the company in 2000. Over the next 18 years, the company progressed through four distinct phases (see Table A).

**Table A: The a2 Milk Company’s Four Phases of Development**

| Phase | Years   | Revenue (NZ$ mil) | Description (Type of Company)   | Key Actions                                                                 |
|-------|---------|-------------------|---------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1     | 2000–07 | $7 in FY07        | Technology & IP                 | Developed IP & licensed technology to others                                 |
| 2     | 2007–12 |                   | Branded Milk                    | Became an operating company, produced milk, expanded into Australia          |
| 3     | 2012–15 |                   | Branded Dairy                   | Entered infant formula & new markets (US, UK, & China)                      |
| 4     | 2015–18 | $550 in FY17      | Branded Dairy Nutrition         | Expanded product line, geography, and customers                              |

**Source:** Compiled by casewriter from The a2 Milk Company, USA & Asia Investor Presentation, slides 11 and 30, 3-Apr-17.

In the first phase (2000–07), it focused on developing intellectual property (IP) and licensing that IP to certified laboratories around the world. They trademarked the names A2 and a2 Milk®, which were particularly valuable because they represented the products’ critical point of differentiation (A1 vs. A2) and could be used on other dairy products. They also obtained patents covering the detection of A1 proteins in cows and milk, the process of A2 herd formation, and the beneficial uses of A1-free dairy products. Initially, they had six families of patents, a number that eventually grew to 15 families in countries around the world. Although some of the first patents expired in 2015 (i.e., one for testing milk for the A1 protein), others would remain in effect through 2036. According to Susan Massasso, the firm’s chief marketing officer (CMO):

> The strength of a2 Milk Company’s intellectual property comes from the interrelationship between a number of its patents, rather than any individual patent, and the interrelationship between the company’s patents and other forms of IP, especially protected brand marks. This IP position means that no one else can have complete freedom to operate in the manufacturing and advertising of an A1 beta-casein-free proposition in its entirety like we can.

Despite her assertion about the strength of the firm’s IP, an industry blogger cautioned, “[It] is best to use patents as shields and bang loudly on them, but also best not to test them in battle.”

In the second phase (2007–12), a2MC became an operating company with its own milk products. During this phase, they expanded into the larger consumer market in Australia (population 22.2 million vs. 4.4 million in New Zealand in 2010) through a joint venture (JV) with Freedom Foods, a local processor. As part of its Australian strategy, a2MC built a small processing plant near Sydney and positioned its a2 Milk® as a premium-priced, value-added product. Instead of showing happy cows or mentioning competing brands, a2MC’s advertisements showed happy customers and emphasized digestive comfort with slogans like "Feel the difference," "Love milk again," "Better than dairy milk," and "Thank you A2." Like Coca-Cola’s "Have a Coke and a Smile," the slogans made an emotional rather than a rational connection to the product. Massasso described the approach:

> Because the brand has such a profound effect on its target, really understanding that consumer, being able to get under the skin of that person, becomes really important. We’re telling people this is real milk for those who can’t drink milk. I mean, that’s a pretty disruptive statement. We’re different. Not all milk is the same.

In addition to targeting consumers with advertisements, a2MC continued to invest in IP and formally developed "The a2 System®," comprised of the firm’s proprietary commercial processes and know-how from milk supply through consumer sales. This phase was characterized by a clear focus on a single product (drinking milk) with a few minor variations (whole vs. low fat) and a narrow geographic scope. Perhaps the most important move during this period was hiring Geoffrey Babidge as CEO in 2010. Although he had begun his career as a chartered accountant, he had migrated into fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) and brought deep industry knowledge of food and nutritional products. He had been interested in the company for years. In fact, when he first heard about a2MC in 2006, he said, "Finally, a company moving the brand." The company reached an important milestone in 2011: it earned its first profit after being in business for more than 10 years.

Having established the brand, the next phase (2012–15) was about expansion and growth as a2MC became a branded dairy company. a2MC expanded the product line into infant formula and the distribution network into the U.S., U.K., and China. Like its approach in Australia, a2MC created a sales and marketing company and also hired its first CMO (Massasso) in 2013 to drive awareness, product trial, and sales.

The fourth and current phase (2015–present) was about "profitably making a difference in people’s lives across a wider range of products, a larger geographic footprint, and a wider demographic (infants to seniors)." CMO Massasso described this phase: "Our biggest challenge is the sheer number of opportunities for us. Just choosing what to do and what not to do within our financial boundaries [is extremely difficult]." But it was a nice problem to have.

At the end of fiscal year 2017 (FY17), a2MC had revenues of NZ$550 million and net income of NZ$91 million, up 56% and 198%, respectively, over the prior year (see Exhibit 7). Through the first half of FY18, revenue was up 33%, and profitability was improving: its gross and net margins were 50% and 21%, respectively, and it was generating a return on equity of almost 40%. The company had a market capitalization of NZ$6 billion and was listed on both the Australian and New Zealand stock exchanges.

## The a2 Milk Company in Early 2018

As of early 2018, a2MC looked more like a technology and marketing company than a conventional dairy processor because of its emphasis on R&D and owning physical assets. It contracted with firms along the supply chain to provide the necessary services. For example, it contracted with farmers to convert their herds using a2MC’s genetic tests and paid them a 10% premium to cover the cost of testing all cows, segregating them, and creating a dedicated, A1-free supply line. It then contracted with processors in New Zealand to produce drinking milk (e.g., Fresha Valley in 2009) and infant formula (e.g., Synlait in 2012). Once this required dedicated facilities and segregated supply lines. To ensure quality, a2MC tested the milk again, then the company transported finished goods to retailers—primarily the Australian supermarkets—where it was sold to consumers. Babidge described the approach this way:

> Where we add value is in developing the science, the IP, and sales, marketing, and distribution. We have a capital-light, smart business model. We put in place medium- to long-term relationships with outsourced parties that have complementary businesses where we are satisfied as to the quality of the product that is produced.

Although 80% of its products were sold in Australia and New Zealand (Exhibit 8 shows sales by product and geographic segments), a large fraction ended up in China, particularly the infant formula. The market for infant formula in China was especially attractive for three reasons: the market was very large (see Exhibit 3b), it was growing rapidly (growth of 10% per year vs. 3% to 5% in other regions), and it was largely import-based because of a tragic poisoning incident in 2008. a2MC met this demand in two ways. First, it had an exclusive distribution agreement with China State Farm Holding Shanghai, a state-owned agriculture firm with an extensive distribution network, experience with high-end consumer products, and knowledge of China’s regulatory system to sell a