<!-- image -->

GCHAN SUBRAMANIA N

## Frasier (A)

Just one into his new job at the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) and Mark Graboff had a problem: Graboff was the team that was responsible for renegotiating the rights to Frasier , a popular television show that would play a critical role in NBC's fall 2001  programming While Paramount, the owner of the show, seemed to be demanding S8 million per episode in the press, NBC had calculated that it would have to pay under $5 million in order to make a on the show. Multiplying by 24 episodes per season, and multiplying again by the three-year term that Paramount was insisting on, the gap seemed insurmountable. day leading lineup. profit matters worse, the most likely other bidder for the show was the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), a rival network to NBC and Graboff' s former employer. "On November 13" [2000], my last 1 was putting the finishing touches on CBS's contract extension to Everybody Loves Raymond; recalled Graboff: And 1 was thinking, 'Thank goodness this deal is almost done: The next 1 began at NBC, and I was faced with an equally arduous negotiation.' Graboff watched the sun set over the Los Angeles   skyline as the   background documents on the negotiation. Making day day

## Industry Background

Behind the glitz and the glamour , the stars and the scandals, Hollywood is, at its core, a business. Studios , such as Warner Brothers Television; Paramount Television Group, and Twentieth Fox Television, make television shows and license them to networks, such as NBC, CBS, and the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), for a specified of time.a Networks, in turn, generate revenue by airtime that companies use to present advertisements. The higher the ratings for a certain show , the more the networks can charge for commercials that show\_ A single equals 1,022,000 households, or 1% of the nation's estimated 102.2 million TV homes. quarterly   ratings   periods, known as "sweeps;' stunts and specials to boost ratings. Century period selling during ratings During point

In fact, the license fees that the networks pay cover only about 70% of the studio's production costs. Studios have to wait about four years to produce enough episodes 10 sell the reruns into syndication. Hit shows, such as Seinfelà, Mad About and The Simpsons , can then make hundreds of millions of dollars in profits. Nevertheless , only about one in ten shows stays on the air enough and is popular enough even to be put into syndication. Most shows, in fact, are canceled in their first or second seasons . You , long

Research Associate Michelle Kalka prepared this case under the supervision of Professor Guhan Subramanian: HBS cases are developed solely as the basis for class discussion: Cases are not intended to serve as endorsements , sources of primary data, or illustrations of effective or ineffective management.

Copyright @ 2001 President and Fellows of Harvard College:   To order copies or request permission to reproduce materials , call 1-800-545-7685, write Harvard Business School Publishing Boston, MA 02163, or go to harvardedu. No part of this publication may be reproduced , stored in retrieval svstem, used in spreadsheet, or transmitted in anv form or by any means ~electronic mechanical , photocopying' recording' or otherwise -without the permission of Harvard Business School. http: hbsP

9-801-447

REV: JUNE 13, 2002

Historically , the standard business model in television consisted of a studio licensing a show to a network for an initial of typically four At the end of that license period, if the network wanted to the show, it had an exclusive 30-day negotiation period, usually in February , to negotiate a deal to extend the license. If no deal had been reached by the end of those negotiations, the studio would submit a final offer to the network. If the network rejected that final offer, the studio was free to the show to other networks, but only on financial terms equal to or more favorable to the studio than in the final offer to the incumbent network. If the terms were less favorable to the studio than the terms in the final offer rejected by the incumbent network, then the incumbent network would have the opportunity to match such terms. Renewal contracts were usually for one or two years, often with options for additional depending on the show's period years . keep shop ratings. years

The 1990s brought about dramatic changes to this business model.  In April 1993, the Federal Communications Commission out the rules that   kept networks   from distributing the programs that broadcast. With networks no longer   prohibited from  supplying their own programs , began producing programs in-house and extracting ownership in shows from outside studios. By 2000, in fact, networks owned Or all of most of the shows on their schedules. Mirroring the networks' move upstream; studios began moving downstream by creating their own networks. Bob Daly, former chairman of Warner Brothers  teamed up with Fox president Jamie Kellner and other Fox alumni to launch a new network, the WB. Paramount studios had the same idea, and in partnership with United Television; created the United Paramount Network (UPN) . phased they they part

Most dramatically, the entertainment and media industries witnessed a steady stream of massive had snapped up Fox Broadcasting; and, in 1999, Viacom, the owner of Paramount  Communications , MTV , Nickelodeon; and Blockbuster Entertainment, bought CBS for approximately $36 billion\_the largest media deal ever. Viacom now had the of producing shows in its Paramount Television Group and them on CBS. NBC was left as the only network without a partner in the movie business. In 1999 NBC had discussions with USA Networks, Time Warner , and about teaming up in some way, but the discussions all fell apart over a variety of issues , including and control. Corp. option airing Sony price

## Frasier's Early Years: 1993-1998

Frasier   is the fifth-most   honored ever\_ The only show to be awarded five consecutive Emmys for best comedy series, Frasier is only a few statuettes away from the 29 Emmys amassed by The Tyler Moore Show. A spinoff of NBC's legendary Cheers, Frasier premiered in September 1993 as its title character, the pompous perpetually insecure psychiatrist Dr. Frasier Crane, divorced his wife, moved from Boston back to his hometown of Seattle, and attempted to begin life anew as the host of a radio advice show. Mary yet immediately after the hit show Seinfeld , Frasier's initial time slot was Thursdays at 9.30 P:m. on NBC, as a scheduling slot as existed in prime time television:. Steve Sternberg, an advertising executive, quipped that 'you could read the phone book after Seinfeld and a 25 [percent viewer] share "1 In fact, Seinfeld was only the most recent anchor of NBC's powerhouse Thursday night. In the fall of 1984, NBC introduced a Thursday night Cheers,   Night   Court, and Hill  Street   Blues, starting a 15-year run of undisputed  Thursday   night dominance. Jeff Zucker, the president of NBC Entertainment; proclaimed, "Thursday is the number one priority of this network."2 Airing good get lineup

heavily to promote their products to the crucial 18-t0-49 demographic the network's Thursday night to customers   for weekend   releases, a Paid during Paid prime

substantial premium to advertise with NBC. In fact, Thursday was responsible for generating 38% of the network's overall revenues.3 Certain hit shows, such as Seinfeld and ER, could command $500,000 or more for each 30-second commercial, also elevating rates on the series that played adjacent to them as well as on late newscasts and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno.4 Leslie Moonves, president of CBS Television, declared , economic value of a hit on Thursday is three times as much as a hit on Wednesday and maybe five times as much as a hit on "5 "The Friday.

Hoping to spread the seeds of Thursday's success, NBC at times shipped its hit Thursday shows to other nights , trying to make those nights into what Thursday had become while keeping Thursday fresh. In the mid-1990s, Mad About You and Hope &amp; Gloria were transferred to to unseat ABC's dominance of the night, Frasier , in its sophomore season; was switched to Tuesdays at 8 p.m

The producers and cast of Frasier were upset about the move to Tuesdays, viewing the change as a demotion from the coveted Thursday night slot:. Nevertheless, despite the change in night and time factors which had the potential to confuse viewers\_Frasier eventually did splendidly on Tuesdays, jump-starting NBC's Tuesday night lineup, and tying or ABC's Home Improvement, a show that had earlier battered a young Seinfeld . beating

NBC was wonderfully . In 1996, the   "Peacock Network" was nearly seven times as profitable as ABC, the only other network to make money that year. 6 However, NBC's success was not as secure as it may have seemed: in 1997, Seinfeld , "the show about nothing' contributed some 40% to the network's $500 million in profits 7 When Seinfeld announced the end of his nineyear-old mega-hit in December 1997, NBC began shuffling its shows around, fearing that for the first time since 1984, it might be vulnerable on Thursday nights. doing Jerry

## In Seinfeld' s Shadow: 1998-1999

For the 1998-1999 season, NBC moved Frasier back to Thursday, replacing Seinfeld at 9 P.m. This time slot represented a sort of homecoming for Frasier's star, Kelsey Grammer , who had originated the role of Dr. Crane in that time slot when it was occupied by Cheers. NBC executives hoped that Frasier would be an appropriate replacement for Seinfeld because both shows appealed particularly to male viewers. In addition, Frasier had continued to do exceedingly well on Tuesdays. In fact; Frasier's 1997-1998 season finale received the week's highest in 14.4 million homes and the network to first   place  in the 18-t0-49 demographic   coveted by advertisers 8 NBC   quietly negotiated an extension for up to three more seasons for the five-year-old show, ultimately paying close to $5 million per in the eighth season. ratings, airing leading episode

The 1998-1999 season was a difficult time for NBC. Nearly all of NBC's freshman series were failures , and many of its former hits were showing their age: On Mondays, the ratings for Caroline in the City and Suddenly Susan were dismal; on Tuesdays, Mad About You was no longer the hit it once was; On Wednesdays, 3" Rock from the Sun was similarly languishing: And on Thursdays, commented Marc Berman, a TV analyst, 'Frasier is no Seinfeld."9 Indeed, by December, Frasier's ratings were down 26% from what Seinfeld had delivered the same the previous (partially due to a depressing plot twist in which Dr. Crane was unemployed and morose)  and NBC dropped to second place behind CBS in its first Seinfeld sweeps. In an effort to rejuvenate NBC's flagging position, 38-year-old wunderkind Scott Sassa Warren Littlefield as NBC Entertainment President. during period year postreplaced

In one of his first moves , Sassa proposed moving Frasier back to Tuesdays, but Paramount vetoed the idea, a contract term that it claimed stipulated the Thursday time slot. 10 This exchange highlighted the growing tension between NBC and the show's producers and cast. For example, after NBC bought promotional ads praising Friends as "the #1 comedy on television; the Frasier team became embittered when NBC did not do the same when Frasier came out on in the ratings. 11 The Frasier cast also felt short-changed when received leather-bound of their scripts at the same time that NBC was giving the Will &amp; Grace cast $40,000 Porsche automobiles. By mid-season, Frasier's ratings were up 25% from the previous year, and NBC won the February 1999 sweeps, but Frasier still lived in Seinfeld' s shadow. Grammer told the press, "This ratings flak is such treated like we're in the bottom ten."12 The show's executive producer , Christopher Lloyd, echoed Grammer's dissatisfaction: really wanted us to be Seinfeld . The NBC people told thought we'd do Seinfeld numbers or better. Talk about pressure How can you win all those Emmys and be one of the one or two comedies on TV, and have the you' re a failure?"13 citing top copies they Kelsey being top "They they top feeling

In the 1998-1999 season, then, Thursdays on NBC were not what once were Viewership on the night had dropped off 16% from the previous season. Even ER, the network's flagship drama, had lost more than 15% of its audience by the end of the season. When, in 1999, five of a certain week's eight shows were finally from NBC's Thursday night it was a bittersweet it was the lowest-rated Thursday evening of first-run shows for NBC since 1994. they May lineup, victory: top 14

## Bouncing Back: 1999-2000

NBC entered the 1999-2000 season by bringing Garth Ancier over from the WB as chief programming executive; just as the network began to fare better in the The season premieres of Friends and Frasier ranked #1 and #2, respectively, and the return of ER the next week won the t0-49 demographic. Momentum slowed, but in late December , Frasier had its highest-rated episode in five years, and NBC claimed the number one position among adults 18-t0-49. The biggest threat to NBC's Thursday night was ABC's Who Wants to be a Millionaire, which often drew nearly 30 million viewers three times a week, and at one had a nine-week winning streak in the 18-t0-49 demographic. Yet by spring, Frasier was well Millionaire, often winning its time-slot:. Frasier's season finale, the much-awaited in which the romance between Niles and Daphne was finally realized, drew 33.7 million viewers the best ever for the show and the largest audience on any night since the Seinfeld finale. ratings. point doing against episode ratings

In the spring of 2000, the show's seventh season, Paramount offered to extend the Frasier contract for an increase over the approximately $5 million per that NBC was currently paying  Even though there was still left in the contract, in view of Frasier's Paramount thought that NBC might be interested in in the show. NBC, however, worried about paying a big fee increase only to see the Frasier audience shrink in coming years, as had happened just two earlier with Mad About You.b After all, Frasier was already seven years old, and despite its as the seventh-most show on television; many in the entertainment industry viewed it as a show on the decline The network turned down Paramount's offer, and instead moved Frasier from Thursday to Tuesday at 9. While NBC executives knew the change could accelerate Frasier's demise, reasoned that   Frasier   probably  only had one two years   left anyway. Moreover, if its went down some on in a year the network would be in a position to renegotiate the show for a bargain. during episode rising ratings, year locking years ranking popular they Tuesdays ratings

b NBC had renewed Mad About You for approximately 53.0 million per episode, only to regret the deal when the series' final season earned low ratings.

Frasier's co-creator and executive producer Peter reflected, "wasn't happy about the move. We thought we did a pretty job in that Thursday slot.:"15 Even if Frasier were to win its Tuesday time slot, it was almost certain to be down in the ratings because NBC was considerably weaker that night. On the move to Tuesdays, Grammer sighed, "Yeah. it certainly looked like somebody was trying to kill us."16 Casey good Kelsey

Into Frasier's former Thursday slot moved Will &amp; Grace. Heading into its third season, this show was supposedly its creative Drawing a younger audience than Frasier , Will &amp; Grace , NBC hoped, would be better competition for the 'older-skewing audience of Millionaire: However, Will &amp; Grace had not demonstrated the drawing\_power of Frasier; It averaged 11.8 million viewers in its second season\_~nearly 10 million fewer than Frasier , and for only place out of the 180 series to air on the six major broadcast networks. Complicating matters was the fact that while Paramount  owned Frasier and NBC had no ownership interest in the show, Will &amp; Grace was produced and owned by NBC's in-house production company. hitting peak. yet good

Much to certain skeptics' surprise, Frasier thrived on Tuesdays. It became the embodiment of socalled "appointment viewing;' a show that brings viewers to it at a particular hour irrespective of the programs that precede or follow it. In its first two broadcasts of the season, the show averaged 25.3 million viewers ~more than double the audience for 3" Rock from the Sun in the half-hour before it and more than 40% higher than the programs televised after it.17 Grammer gloated, As it turns out, can strand us in the desert of whatever night you wanted to and at least some people, the people who think our show is worth a look, would be there, they'Il find it. They've proven that to and Im to them."18 By March 2000, Frasier was still averaging 17 million viewers a week, down from its performance on Thursdays the previous two years, but 4.5 million viewers more than its nearest time-period rival, ABC's Dharma &amp; 19 Frasier ranked a solid in Nielsen Media Research's season-to-date ratings, second only to Millionaire on Tuesday nights.20 Kelsey you grateful during 15t Greg.

Even though the show succeeded on Tuesdays , many people who worked on Frasier  still felt betrayed by the network for shipping it to a less popular night. The continuing rift between the cast and the network was evident when David Hyde   Pierce, who played Frasier's brother   Niles , remarked , disappointment in the move to Tuesday night was that, in the seventh or eighth season, most shows do start to off in quality, the audience starts to off in interest, and that could easily have happened to us. It didn't, and how nice it would have been for the network to believe in the show enough [to leave it on Thursday nights]:"21 "My big drop drop

## The 2001 Negotiations

Into this situation entered Marc Graboff. Graboff was a lawyer by starting at one of the large Los Angeles law firms and spending 15 practicing entertainment law. He moved to the business side in 1997 when he became the #2 person in CBS's Business Affairs department. He was promoted to the #1 slot in August 1998. In 1999, he attention and credit in the industry for his instrumental work in bringing the hugely popular Survivor series to CBS. Described by the New York Post as the "Survivor Swami;"22 Graboff explains his involvement: training years gained public

Imet with the creative executives, who said "How can we figure out a way to pay for this show?" Networks typically don't have budgets for original programming in the summer; there are not a lot of viewers, and there's not very much ad revenue available. So I worked with the CBS sales department and the production people, and we came up with a business model that made sense for Survivor on CBS in the summer. 1 helped create the business structure the economic model that we to create the joint venture that owned the show. used

With Survivor , Graboff was now very much on the radar screen of all the major networks. In October 2000, Scott Sassa approached Graboff and offered him the job of Executive Vice President, NBC West Coast. " was going to oversee more of the business-\_NBC Network, NBC Studios, and NBC Enterprises and I was also going to oversee the legal department: It was a opportunity and I jumped at it: On November 14, Graboff began work at NBC headquarters in Burbank, where he would report directly to NBC West Coast president Scott Sassa. As he was settling in to his new office, Graboff a call from Sassa: "Im going to send over the Frasier file. Get up to speed on it. Let's figure out a negotiating great got phone strategy .

Graboff understood the critical importance of the upcoming contract negotiations to Frasier on NBC. As viewers were siphoned away by competing from cable networks and broadcast networks such as Fox, the WB, and UPN, the "Big Three networks (ABC, NBC, and CBS) had found it increasingly difficult   to establish  programs that could draw the huge audiences that had seen in years past. While in 1992, 60% of viewers were tuned to one of the Big Three networks time, by 1997 only 49% were watching 23 Paradoxically, as the major networks lost viewers  advertisers would pay more for commercial time shows that reached a large audience all at once. In this way, the networks were under more pressure than ever before to keep their shows that had proven drawing keep being options upstart they during Prime during power.

Unfortunately , no new NBC series that season, including the highly anticipated Michael Richards Show , had been considered a success, much less a replacement for a hit like Frasier. While NBC's established shows, such as Friends , Frasier , Law &amp; Order , ER, and The West had been keeping the network with NBC to air a successful TV show such as Survivor , and with its aging hit show Friends set to end after the next season, some analysts speculated that Frasier would mean an end to NBC's leadership in time. Graboff had a bleak assessment of the situation: "Without Frasier , our Tuesday night was kind of a wasteland. That year we already had a wasteland on Monday night, on Sunday night, and on Saturday night. There are only so many nights you can be out of business . Steve Sternberg; a senior partner at an ad-buying firm, stated, "d be very surprised if let it Especially with the lack of new programming success, NBC wants to do everything it can to on to Frasier."24 Wing, reality strong' yet losing prime they g0. hang

Graboff knew , however , that these negotiations would be different from those in years When NBC had last negotiated a Frasier renewal with Viacom-owned Paramount in 1998, Viacom had to CBS. The CBS acquisition radically transformed the negotiation landscape. NBC was aware that if it failed to reach a deal with Paramount in the 2001   negotiations,   then Paramount's company, Viacom; could easily place Frasier on its own network, CBS an that NBC had not anticipated when it had negotiated for Frasier in 1998. Had Paramount been affiliated with a network at that time, NBC might have insisted on including a so-called "self-dealing' clause in the Frasier contract. Such clauses a year after the show leaves the incumbent network. With no such self-dealing clause in the current Frasier contract, Paramount could the show on CBS immediately if it did not reach a deal to it on NBC. past. yet buy parent option keep put

Generally, switching networks destroys value for both the new network and the studio: the show typically earns lower ratings on the new network due to viewer confusion, which in turn, shortens the life of the show, hurting the studio. Still, switching networks was not unprecedented. For studio had ever taken a show away from one network in order to it on its own sister network perhaps afraid that the networks would retaliate and boycott future programs from that studio. The ultimate fear was that the networks and studios would cease business with each other entirely , so that, for example, Disney shows would air only on ABC, and Paramount shows yet put doing

only on CBS. In fact, made a move in this direction in 1999 by combining management of its television production unit with its network, ABC, partly to ensure that more Disney-produced shows were aired on the network. Still, an industry source with experience in blockbuster renewals said networks would be foolish to rely solely on their sister studios for shows. "You need compatible programming to come from competitive studios in order to schedule afloat. Paramount is not going to be able to supply all the programs to CBS."25 Disney keep your

## Preparation

After getting up to speed on what had happened in Frasier negotiations, Graboff had the sales, research, and scheduling departments together an analysis projecting the show's ratings and commercial sales. Graboff recalls: past put

I said, ~let's play the scenario out. Based on our research and sales~what do we think the show is going to do?" Let's assume the show is on Tuesdays at 9.00, but let's also do an analysis of the show on Thursdays , just we can have that. What would our break-even license fee be? We did that analysis, and we figured out that the current   license fee [of approximately $5.0 million] was significantly higher  than our break-even license fee. So in order to keep this show at either break-even or at a slight loss, were going to have to lower the license fee for the next three years. And here we've numbers like S8 million per episode floated in the press. When I looked at the analysis and how much we were going to lose even if we kept the license fee stable, my first question was why are we in this negotiation at all? "Okay got being

In November  and December of 2000, Graboff discussed this   question The analyzed what alternatives the network would have if it lost the show. In order to replace Frasier , the network would have to find another comedy that could provide a comparably sized audience: Some newspaper articles implied that if NBC were to lose Frasier , then 2Oth Century Fox TV, the studio that made Frasievs time slot competitor, ABC's Dharma &amp; might stall in making a deal in Dharma's exclusive contract renegotiations in February 2001, hoping to higher bid from NBC once the studio could the show to other networks. Indeed, with the scarcity of high-rated comedies, NBC would almost be forced to bid for a show from another network. This unprecedented possibility that a network that wanted to a show would lose it to the sister network of the show's studio could trigger a bidding war in which all the networks vied for each other's programs. In a worst case scenario, Graboff and Sassa speculated that there could be a drastic increase in programming costs for all the networks. Pair Greg, get shop keep

In January 2001, Jeff Zucker joined NBC as president of NBC Entertainment and became part of that   NBC would be willing to take a loss on Frasier. NBC could not risk triggering a bidding war by to poach another comedy from another network; moreover , NBC did not want to see Frasier , a show that it had promoted for eight years , g0 to another network. Even though Frasier as a stand-alone entity might generate a loss, the show was a "tent for NBC, in that the network used the audience flow from Frasier at 9 p.m. to launch new shows at 9.30. Frasier was a particularly tent because it had an upscale audience, some of whom might carry over to the 9.30 viewing slot and generate high-premium advertising dollars there: "Sometimes you' re prepared to take a small loss; explained Graboff. "Sometimes re prepared  to break-even: Sometimes you won't do a deal unless you're going to make money- We steeled ourselves to the idea of paying a license fee that was more than our break-even, and more than what we were then paying: We said, we're prepared to lose more money than normal on this show; now let's to limit that having top pole" good pole you' 'Okay' loss. try

The next in Graboff' s analysis was to assess  the walk-away alternatives for Paramount:. Clearly the show would have to g0 to one of the "Big Three" networks; Fox, UPN and WB would be extremely unlikely to steal such a megahit show because did not have the viewership and therefore could not afford the ABC, Graboff felt, was also not a competitor for the show: "NBC is the kind of place where the market is set for the premium-type shows. We knew that ABC wasn't a player at the that we were already about, because it wouldn' t have made sense for them, though Paramount kept promising us that ABC was very interested in it. This left CBS. On one hand, Graboff knew CBS better than he knew NBC, spent four years at the rival network. Based on this experience, Graboff believed that CBS too was not a meaningful competitor for the show: "I knew that the license fee we were currently paying was in excess of what CBS could make in net ad revenue for the show. I estimated that CBS's break-even license fee would be about $3 million. In any case, though, if you look at it from just a corporate standpoint,   from a Viacom corporate standpoint, dollars in the door to Viacom were going to be from NBC than from CBS. On the other hand, CBS and Paramount shared a corporate in Viacom, which made the analysis far more complex. Graboff described the situation: step they price tag: price prices talking having greater parent

Usually, you look at the economics of a show from an ad revenue and cost standpoint and say, "OK, my counterpart at ABC is looking at the same Fox is looking at the same CBS is at the same We all know what each other's ad revenues pretty much say that a certain show at a certain is not business for anybody. Its a level playing field. For example, in the negotiations with Universal for Just Shoot that was a level playing field, because Universal had no affiliated network But in Frasier , we weren't with a level playing field. Forget about what CBS pays Paramount for the license fee because that's just internal dollars. The real question is, what does the outside world, in the form of ad revenue, pay to Viacom? I knew that our numbers on the table were going to be more than that. So [ knew that the only way it to CBS is if [CBS CEO] Les Moonves convinces [Viacom COO] Mel Karmazin that putting Frasier on CBS is a triple whammy. It it off NBC. It it on CBS, where it becomes a tent And third, I knew that there was a struggle going on between certain levels of CBS and Paramount, and that getting Frasier on CBS would help CBS's political cause That was was factor nonetheless . thing thing looking thing: price good Me , dealing goes gets pole. gets power

Although contact between CBS and Paramount was prohibited by the exclusivity agreement between NBC and Paramount (described in more detail below) CBS executives offered none-toosubtle hints from the sidelines. "If a show became  available, we'd always listen; stated Moonves. "It might be an offer we couldn't refuse."26 In addition, as early as late November the In early December, for example, a Los Angeles Times article quoted one Paramount executive saying' '[NBC] didn't believe in the long-term viability of the show. We will make an effort to the show where it is. But if we have to do it, we think the viewers will travel with followed us back to Tuesdays, and its not too much to expect that would follow the show to another network."27 The press spotted Grammer dinner with Moonves and his entertainment chief Tellem. While the was reportedly about putting new shows from Grammer' s production company, Gramnet Productions, on CBS, several stories suggested that to subvert NBC were also discussed. Graboff reflected on this dimension of the negotiations: great keep They they Kelsey having Nancy meeting plans

The press was trying to hype up the tenseness and the fight between Paramount and NBC and the whole CBS angle. just thought it was a story- Frankly, fueled the fire more than it needed to we were trying to keep a low But if necessary, if we reached an impasse in the negotiations , we were going to use the press in our favor: We were going to make sure that we out there publicly all the bad things about the show , how it slid They they great be , profile. got

in the ratings, how shows don't change networks successfully , and all sorts of stuff that would make it unappealing for somebody else to it. After all, worked at CBS, I was in a better position that anybody else to evaluate the chances of the show switching hands. And ultimately, it came down to the question of whether we were prepared to play and risk the show going to CBS for non-financial reasons. buy having poker

## Negotiating the Process

On January 23, 2001, NBC sent a letter to Paramount describing the process for their negotiations (see Exhibit 1) An exclusive negotiating would begin on February 1 and end on March 1. While this process was standard in the industry , Graboff and his counterpart at Paramount wanted to be clear about the ground rules for their negotiation. period

Even before negotiations began, one of the issues that Paramount took off the table was the length of the license agreement. Kelsey Grammer insisted that NBC agree to a three-year 'pick-up" from the outset. While three years was a extension; especially for a show as old as Frasier , Grammer had other motivations that led him to insist on this provision. If three more seasons were added to the eight the show had already aired, Frasier's 11-year run would equal that of Cheers, the show from which it had been spun off. Grammer said, "Ialways thought, the we started the show, it should be the same run as Cheers."28 In addition, Grammer repeatedly said that he wanted to match the record for the longest-running primetime television character , currently held by Gunsmoke star James Arness, who played the character Matt Dillon for 20 seasons.29 With a three-year pickup, Frasier Crane would have appeared on Cheers for 9 seasons and Frasier for 11 more, thus tying the record. long day7

NBC , meanwhile, wanted as short a pick-up as possible. Graboff recalls:

Our big concern was that the show was starting to show signs of age: We felt that it had one year, two, left in it after the eighth season; but that the third year could potentially be disastrous. We didn't want to have to commit to the third year. If we were going to lose money in years one and two, we were going to our projection. We made several proposals that had a three-year pick-up but a cutback right that said if the ratings fell below a certain number in our 18-t0-49 demographic in the second year\_which was kind of a disaster-scenario number\_we didn't have to pick up the show in the third year. Our argument was, by that time, everybody's embarrassed. And their attitude was, "That's a non-starter . will be insulted. You don't want to do this. So Scott [Sassa] went and talked to and asked him squarely, "Is three really that important to And basically   said, "Look, at the end of the you' re not going to be 7 S0 that gave us the comfort we needed to say this issue was off the table. good maybe get Kelsey Kelsey , years you?" Kelsey okay parties were ready to begin negotiating in earnest:.

## Negotiating Price

As stipulated in their January 23 letter , negotiations began on February 1, 2001. Graboff led the negotiations for his side, but consulted regularly with Sassa and Zucker back at NBC. Often the trio would contact the sales , research, and scheduling departments to 'run the numbers" for the various scenarios envisioned. Occasionally involved Bob Wright, CEO of NBC, who maintained à keen interest from the outset in how the negotiations were progressing; Paramount Television Group they they

Chairman McCluggage led the negotiating team for Paramount; and was frequently joined by Hart, president of Paramount Network TV. Kerry Gary

According to Graboff, the negotiations by this stage were focused 'purely on at best, 'price, and some ancillary things which were, if you boil it down, price-related: Here the parties faced a significant  gap. Before the negotiations started, rumors   floated in the press   that Paramount wanted $8.0 million per episode an enormous increase over the currentdeal. Media industry analysts doubted that NBC would pay more than $5.8 million per episode, the it was paying for Friends, its highest-rated and most expensive sitcom (situation While Paramount did not raise the $8.0 figure once the negotiating the still faced a gap between their initial offers. Said Graboff: price; Or , really comedy). 30-day period large parties

Paramount's initial offer was about a 20% increase over what we were currently paying' while our initial number was about 5% less than what we were paying- In other words, our initial number was about a million and a quarter dollars less per episode than theirs: Usually when you're negotiating licenses, you're tens of thousands of dollars apart, not millions of dollars apart.

These early negotiations took place over the with an occasional summit meeting between McCluggage and Scott Sassa, or between McCluggage and Bob Wright:. phone, Kerry Kerry

As the clock ticked toward the March 1 deadline, NBC tried to find creative ways of bridging the gap. First, NBC's negotiating team proposed ratings-based increases and decreases: For every tenth of a ratings the show performed over a certain the network would pay the studio specified bonus, up to a predetermined cap. Second, in addition to the license fee, NBC offered money in the form of development commitments for Paramount, for Grammer' s production Street Productions).d " 'Development commitments boil down to money; explained Graboff, "but it came out of a different of money for us, so in some ways it was easier to give. point rating Kelsey pool

Even after this creative deal structuring, NBC and Paramount remained approximately $500,000 refused to make further concessions: point

Paramount came down from their initial by about a half a million dollars   [per episode] and then in their heels. wouldn't and were us that other networks were interested, and that it was going to g0 to another network if we didn't come up with this It all became a question of, do we want to call their bluff? Do we want to allow this to g0 the marketplace and see whether re the truth or not? That was really what we were faced with There were several meetings where we looked at each other across the table and we were at a standoff. We walked away from the table a couple of times when brought up a couple of that claimed were on the table that had never been on the table. We just really angry and we walked away. We threatened them a bunch of times , and threatened us as well. For a while, it really ugly. price dug They budge, telling they they price. telling they points they they got they got

Graboff speculates that interested outside observers , not Paramount, had floated the S8 million number: "There were some gadflies who had financial interests in the show\_ A couple of the agents, who represent some of the producers and the talent on the show , had a strong interest to get the as high as possible: So thats how the S8 million got leaked price

Development commitments are equivalent to "take or pay' contracts in other industries. That is, if a network decides not to air a producer's pilot or at least six episodes of his or her series , the development commitment mandates that the network still pay the producer a predetermined amount.

## The End Game

March 1, the deadline for the exclusive negotiating period, was a Thursday: There had been several even throughout   the of March 1 Graboff   did not call his Paramount counterparts, nor did call him. At 8 p.m., Graboff left his office and headed for home. Graboff recalled: day they

I was in my car, and I a call. It was the Paramount guys. said, "What are you in your car? We want to work through the night to this done And I said, "No, we're not going to this done tonight. Scott [Sassa] went home, Jeff [Zucker] went home, and Im going home. You guys can up all night if you want. Knock yourselves out: They got doing get get stay

As he up the phone, Graboff swallowed hard. He knew that by not going back to the table that night, he risked a frustrated Paramount present him with their Last Offer, a take-it-orleave-it deal that would then allow Paramount to take the show to CBS and possibly fuel a bidding war. At the same time, he had analyzed Paramount's position and thought he knew where stood\_ He was intimately familiar with CBS's economics, he knew its personalities and culture, and he understood how CBS, Paramount, and Viacom all interacted. This was his first negotiation on behalf of NBC and it was important for him to start off on the right foot. After Frasier , exclusive negotiating periods for The West and Just Shoot Me were just around the corner . hung having they Wing

## Exhibit 1 Letter Defining the Terms of the Negotiations

January 23, 2001

Re: "FRASIER" Renewal Negotiations

Dear [Paramount executive]:

This will confirm that our exclusive negotiation will commence February 1, 2001. In order to confirm that we are both on the exact same page with respect to the negotiations for the renewal of "FRASIER Iam you this summary of the terms. period sending

- 1 The first negotiation lasts from February 1, 2001 to March 1, 2001. Both NBC and [Paramount]  acknowledge that this negotiation was not affected by any previous exploratory discussions (as confirmed in my fully-executed letter to dated November 29 2000) period period you
- 2 If there is no agreement reached by March 1, 2001, Paramount will submit its last offer ("Last Offer") to NBC. If NBC rejects said Last Offer , Paramount is free to negotiate  with third parties, subject to the matching rights of NBC set forth below.
- 3 If Paramount wants to license the series to a third party (including, without limitation; CBS) on financial terms less favorable to Paramount than the Last Offer, NBC has 10 days to match the show to a third  party (including, without limitation; CBS) on financial terms equal to or more favorable than the last offer , without any further obligation to NBC.
4. If NBC's right to match an offer comes into play, NBC must match the aggregate, total financial value of the third party offer within 10 days of NBC's receipt of notice of the third party offer. Such financial value would include, without limitation; terms such as the term of the license fee, the number of episodes ordered, and any sharing of any revenue streams.
- 5 NBC's matching right continues until March 1, 2002.

The above reflects our understanding of the agreement, and we are proceeding in reliance thereon.

Best personal regards.

truly yours , Very

[NBC executive]

## Endnotes

- 1 Elizabeth Lesly, Ronald Grover, and Jeanne Dugan; "Seinfeld: The Economics of a TV Supershow and What It Means for NBC and the Industry ; Business Week, June 2, 1997, p. 116.
- 3 Ronald Grover , "Frasier Vs. 'Stone Cold' Steve? Lets Get It On'; Business Week, September 6, 1999, P. 38.
- 2 Bill Carter , "The Thursday Night Fights: CBS NBC Stiff Competition on a It Owns; New York Times, January 18, 2001, P. C1. Giving Day
- 4 Brian Lowry, "Reshuffling the Deck: Seinfeld   Departure Creates Opportunities for Networks; Sun-Times , December 29, 1997, P. 39. Chicago
- 6 Lesly , Grover , and Dugan, Business Week, June 2, 1997, P. 116.
- 5 Carter, New York Times, January 18, 2001, P. C1.
- 7
- 8 David Bauder , "CBS, Frasier , in First Place for Week; Rocky Mountain News , 29, 1998, p. Dl4. May
- 11 Richard Huff, NBC Execs Have Double Trouble Battle for Frasier , New York Daily News , Bidding
- 9 Jefferson Graham, "NBC Adrift without the Seinfeld Anchor; USA November 5, 1998, P. D3. 10 John Kiesewetter , "Frasier , on Frasier ; Today ,
- 12 Dennis   Hunt,  "Frasier, Woody Toast the Past in Bittersweet   Reunion   Episode' USA Today, February 4, 1999, P. D3.
- 13 Ibid.
- 14 David Bauder, "NBC Win Tightens the Season Ratings Race; Associated Press Newswires , 11, 1999. May
- 15 Tom Feran, A Fresh Start, An Old Slot for Frasier ; Plain Dealer , Oct. 22, 2000, Sunday Arts p.1
- 17 Brian "Relocated, but Not Unseated:   Despite Moved from Its   Prime  Spot on Thursdays   NBC's Frasier   Remains   Firmly Ensconced as a Ratings   Draw ; Los Angeles   Times , November 14, 2000. Lowry, Being
- 16 James Endrst, "Far from Finished Despite a Potentially Fatal Move for Frasier , Rumors of Its Death Have Been Greatly Exaggerated; Hartford Courant, December 12, 2000, P. DI.
- 18 Ibid.
- 19 Brian Lowry , 'Frasier Has a Deal to Cheer; Los Angeles Times, March 7,2001, P. F1.
- 20 David Bauder, "NBC Strikes Deal with Studio to Frasier on the Air for Three More Years; Canadian Press , March 6, 2001. Keep
- 21 Lowry, Los Angeles Times, November 14, 2000.
- 23 Lesly, Grover, and Dugan, Business Week, June 2, 1997, P. 116.
- 22 Michael Starr, "The Starr Report; The New York Post , November 17, 2000.
- 24 Huff, New York Daily News , December 7, 2000, P. 140.
- 26 David Bauder, "Negotiations Alive to Free-Agent TV Shows Frasier  Buffy;" Canadian Press , March 2, 2001. Keep
- 25 Sallie Hofmeister and Braxton, "NBC, Paramount at Impasse Los Angeles Times, Dec. 7, 2000, P. C1. Greg
- 27 Hofmeister and Braxton, Los Angeles Times , December 7 , 2000, P. C1.
- 29 Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz, "High-priced Frasier; Star-Ledger , March 7,2001, P. 71.
- 28 Lowry, Los Angeles Times, November 14, 2000.