# Negotiating Without a Net: A Conversation with the NYPD's Dominick Misino

Negotiation informs all aspects of business life. Interaction with customers, suppliers, partners, and investors involves some kind of negotiation. In fact, in some languages, the same term is used for both "business" and "negotiation." But the costs of failure can be high. The breakdown of negotiations between Hewlett-Packard's management and its founding families, for example, put the company's future in doubt and led to an expensive proxy fight. Everyday simulations of Negotiation 101 don't do enough to prepare businesspeople for the really tough negotiations—the ones where failure is not an option.

Perhaps it's not surprising, then, that the last 20 years have seen an endless stream of handbooks on business negotiation, many of them best-sellers. Or that most of the country's top business schools have entire academic departments devoted to the subject. The advice is often helpful, even insightful. Who could argue with the recommendation that negotiators look for mutual gain and know their best alternative to a negotiated agreement? But you can't help feeling that the scholarly ink and classroom gaming fall short when it comes to the highest-stakes scenarios.

So where can you look for guidance? For the last three decades, the New York Police Department has been training officers in hostage negotiation, arguably the highest-stake situation of all. Founded in 1972, in the year after the Attica State Prison riot, the NYPD program was the country's first such training program. A year later, in the wake of the Munich Olympics hostage crisis, the FBI established its own program, which was modeled on the NYPD's. Today, most law enforcement agencies in this country and others provide some kind of negotiation training, as local and national law enforcement officials face bargaining with armed criminals, terrorists, and psychopaths as part of their daily reality.

To find out what businesspeople can learn about handling tough negotiations from the experience of law enforcement, HBR senior editor Diane L. Coutu visited former NYPD detective and hostage negotiator Dominick Misino at his home (he can be reached at negotiate1@aol.com). A member of the force for 22 years, Misino received international acclaim in 1993 when he successfully persuaded the hijacker of Lufthansa Flight 592 to put down his gun and turn himself in at Kennedy Airport. Misino spent the last six years of his career as a primary negotiator, handling more than 200 incidents and never losing a single life.

Since retiring in 1995, he has taught negotiating skills to law enforcement officials, military personnel, and business executives (for more details, see his website, hostagenegotiation.com). Misino modestly describes hostage negotiation as "applied common sense." In the following interview, edited for clarity and length, he explores what he means by that innocuous-sounding term, painting a vivid picture of the blood, sweat, and tears of hostage negotiation.

## What special skills does it take to be a crisis negotiator?

I don't think it requires special skills. Anyone can do it, man or woman, uniformed or civilian. What crisis negotiation does take is what I call applied common sense: constantly asking myself, "What is the simplest thing I can do to solve the problem?" When I'm dealing with an armed criminal, for example, my first rule of thumb is simply to be polite. This sounds trite, I know, but it is very important.

A lot of times, the people I'm dealing with are extremely nasty. And the reason for this is that their anxiety level is so high: A guy armed and barricaded in a bank is in a fight-or-flight mode. To defuse the situation, I've got to try to understand what's going on in his head. The first step to getting there is to show him respect, which shows my sincerity and reliability. So before the bad guy demands anything, I always ask him if he needs something. Obviously, I'm not going to get him a car. I'm not going to let him go. But it makes excellent sense to be sensitive to the other guy's needs. When you give somebody a little something, he feels obligated to give something back. That's just good common sense.

## Don't you find it difficult to be polite to a murderer or a rapist?

I'll go even further. How do you show respect to a convicted child molester? Believe me, in my line of work, we routinely deal with people who have moved out of society and done things that are just horrific. Obviously, it isn't easy to negotiate with someone you dislike—but if you're a professional, you keep your feelings separate from your work. The advantage is that your goal is constantly right in front of your face: Get everybody out alive. And you're also under incredible time pressure. When an Ethiopian national hijacked that Lufthansa plane, I had less than 45 minutes to build a relationship with him and bring the plane down. There were 104 people on board, and the hijacker had a gun aimed at the pilot's head. That's all the motivation I needed to stay focused on my task. Of course, there are whole countries—even people—who say that we should never negotiate with certain individuals, terrorists, for instance. But I think that's extreme. In reality, we're always ready to negotiate as hard as we can with anyone to show him that there is an alternative to violence. Of course, we're also ready to come in with a tactical solution to deploy the SWAT teams if we have to. But, ideally, force is a last resort.

## Can you give other examples of what you mean by applied common sense?

Another very commonsense technique is to ask the bad guy very early on in a negotiation if he wants you to tell him the truth. I stumbled on this tactic when I first started negotiating. My backup team found out that the bad guy had a history, and I said to him, "Look, you grew up on the streets. So did I. Do you want me to lie to you or tell the truth?" And he said he wanted the truth, which, of course, is exactly what I expected him to say. His situation was desperate; there were snipers all over the place. Who in his right mind would have wanted to be lied to?

The critical thing you get by asking the other guy if he wants the truth is that he enters into an agreement with you right at the start. This is important because a successful negotiation is really a series of small agreements. You use every possible opportunity to agree with your adversary—and to get him to agree with you. Because all the while you're agreeing, the other guy is learning that he can trust you, that nobody's going to hurt him. So I try right away to get to the first yes, and then immediately I go for the second. I tell the bad guy that if he wants me to tell him the truth, then he might hear things he doesn't want to hear and, if that happens, he has to agree not to hurt anybody. In my day, I've negotiated with hostage-takers, hijackers, and murderers; the majority of them have given me their word they won't hurt anyone. These people may be the outcasts of society, but they do have a code of honor. In fact, I would say that over 90% of the times that a criminal has given me his promise, he has kept it.

## If you don't have to learn special skills, do you need certain personal qualities to be a successful high-stakes negotiator?

On the most basic level, you have to be a listener. Unfortunately, like most people, negotiators want to talk and be heard, and so they've got to learn how to let the other person express himself without interruption. That's terribly important because the individuals with whom we are dealing are often the very people who have never been listened to and are desperate to be heard. They just don't have the patience for you to butt in and make a mistake. To get around this, I try to be a very active listener. For example, I typically ask the other guy to tell me his side of the story.

And then I sit back and get an earful. I hear every instance of when the other guy has ever been wronged. I discover how no one has ever cared for him. And a lot of this is true. And that's what matters.

So negotiators are excellent listeners. But they also need to be aware of the noise inside their own heads. Believe me, even if you don't know what's going on inside you, the other guy will. Their sensitivity to your own biases is extraordinary. You need to know your hot buttons and your limitations. Personally, I've got a lot of trouble dealing with pederasts and other people who harm children. But nevertheless, I can negotiate with these people because I'm aware of my feelings. I would even say my feelings help me to become a better negotiator because when I know that something is going to affect me, I work harder to achieve a level of objectivity. That's all part of being comfortable with who you are, which is essential for being able to negotiate. Take police negotiations: They are impromptu and can go on for 50 minutes or ten hours; nobody knows. The only thing for certain is that no one can sustain a facade under that kind of pressure for very long. So the best preparation in the world for a successful negotiation is just to be comfortable with yourself.

One of the most effective ways of identifying emotions and helping the other guy to work them through is by a technique we call mirroring: We echo the other guy's remarks to try and build a bridge between us. For example:

"I got a gun," he says.

"A gun?" I repeat.

"Yeah," he says, "a nine-millimeter gun."

"Nine-millimeter?" I echo.

"Yeah, nine-millimeter with two magazines, 18 rounds."

In this exchange, of course, I'm getting critical data. But at the same time, I'm telling the bad guy that there is no longer a gun separating him and me; instead, there is some vital piece of information that the two of us share. In this way, mirroring is the beginning of a real conversation.

## Your reference to active listening sounds very reminiscent of what psychoanalysts call empathic listening. Can you say more?

Almost by definition, crisis negotiation is a roller coaster of emotions, both yours and the other guy's. To me, being active in listening means being attuned to those emotions. Another active-listening technique is to be constantly on the alert for the feelings expressed behind the words. This is not as obvious as it sounds. My former partner once had an elderly woman who had barricaded herself in a house with a ten-inch butcher knife, and she was cursing at him at the top of her lungs. Despite her profanity, my partner was able to detect something else. He said to her, "Martha, I can hear the pain in your voice." And she went from ranting and raving to absolute silence. No one before had ever picked up on the fact that she was hurting so much. When my partner acknowledged her pain, she put down the butcher knife, and he could begin to treat her like the elderly grandmother she was.

It sounds hokey until you've experienced it, but the very act of listening is empathetic. And when we do talk, we try to reinforce the empathy by using a lot of "we" statements: "We're in this together" or "We can work this out." This is the kind of language that can alleviate the bad guy's isolation and paranoia.

## It sounds as if you're trying to put yourself in the other guy's shoes. Is that right?

Up to a point, but you've got to be careful about telling a hijacker or a rapist that you know exactly what he's going through, because usually you don't. In fact, you can really infuriate people by trying to identify with them, because they know that you know very little about what they've been through in their lives. One time, one of our guys tried to commiserate with a bad guy, and the guy just went ballistic. He started cursing and screaming: "When was the last time you ever held up a bank and took five hostages?" So putting yourself in the other guy's shoes isn't always as helpful as it sounds. In fact, I've often been struck in my own negotiations by how impossible it is for me to imagine the amount of stress a bad guy feels when he's holed up in a building with 100 heavily armed SWAT team officers focused on him, watching his every move. Truthfully, I have probably never felt as scared or angry or lonely in my entire life as that guy does at that moment.

## You've talked about good negotiators; what makes a bad one?

The worst negotiators are the people who hate rejection. Of course, nobody likes rejection—it hurts your feelings. But bad negotiators can't accept the fact that all the negative stuff coming at them is not personal. They think the other guy is angry at them when the other guy doesn't even know them. I used to get yelled at all the time in my job, but as I tell my students, you just have to let the other person vent. Because if you do, there's an incredible payoff.

First of all, the other guy usually feels better. But even more important, in the process of letting off steam, the bad guy is likely to tell you his problem and the solution to his problem. For instance, I once heard a bad guy ranting and raving because a negotiator was Italian. That helped us figure out pretty quickly that the negotiator had to go. But generally speaking, bad negotiators lack this perspective. They get their feelings hurt, which makes them soft or defensive. Both are bad positions from which to negotiate.

## So the other guy needs to vent. What about you?

Certainly, you experience a lot of negative emotions in this job. You feel rage and frustration; you are almost always scared. I once participated in a negotiation that went on for 12 hours, though I wasn't the prime negotiator all that time. The most frustrating part was that the guy refused to talk. He just sat there. When I hear a recording of the negotiation, I can still feel that frustration and rage. If I had acted out and strangled that guy, I probably would have felt better for a moment.

There's nothing wrong with having strong emotions during a negotiation, but you need to acknowledge them so you don't act them out. That's the rule of thumb. But even here, there are some exceptions. The most aggressive thing I've ever said in a negotiation situation was to a burglar who was threatening to kill his hostage, an 84-year-old lady named Ruth. As his threats grew more intense, I felt rage coming up inside me. And I said to the guy, "If you touch a hair on her head, I will personally ID your body in the morgue." Now, threatening your hostage-taker is not a suggested negotiation tactic. But in this situation, my gut told me that if I sat there all day listening to this particular guy threaten this particular lady, he was going to kill her. So I had to intervene. I did, and instantly the criminal backed down.

That was the only time I ever threatened a criminal in this way, but at the same time, I must admit that I do not believe the best negotiators never act on their emotions. If you don't find yourself taking some risks in this job—if you don't find yourself going someplace you never intended on going—then you probably aren't being the best negotiator you can be.

## It seems that you have to put a lid on some strong feelings. What helps you do that?

Having a team behind you is essential. Back in the early days, there were no negotiation teams. Negotiators worked one-on-one, and the stress was extraordinary. The longest consecutive negotiation I ever did was nine hours, and that was like running the New York City Marathon. No one could survive an ordeal like that without team support.

Nowadays, most police negotiation teams consist of five people. There is the primary negotiator, who actually talks to the bad guy. Then there is the commander, who makes all the decisions, and the coach, who provides moral support and backup. These are the primary roles. There’s also a gofer, who runs around gathering vital information, and a guy we call a scribe. He keeps a chronological log of all the important stuff that's going on during the negotiation. It sounds crazy, but one of the things you often forget in the heat of a hostage situation is the other guy's name. So the scribe writes that down in big black letters on a piece of paper, which he tapes to the wall of the house or apartment we're negotiating out of.

An important point about these teams is that they're deliberately set up to separate negotiation from decision-making, which gives the primary negotiator both terrific relief and enormous power to negotiate. Imagine for a moment that you're negotiating and you tell the bad guy that you're in charge. He responds by demanding a car in 30 minutes or he'll take out a hostage. If, on the other hand, you can say, "Look, my commander is in charge, and I have to consult him," you've bought yourself time to maneuver.

This is the way diplomats operate all the time. They work out a proposal and then bring it back to the national leaders for evaluation. In a crisis negotiation, you don't have days and months to discuss a proposal. You don't even have minutes. You come to a fork in the road, and you have fractions of seconds to decide whether to go right or left. This kind of pressure would be unendurable without a team's direction.

## I guess that a lot of the time you didn't meet the people you were dealing with face-to-face. Was that a problem?

I hate to say it, but face-to-face communication is very old-fashioned. We rarely do that nowadays. Originally, the NYPD agreed with the communication gurus who said that face-to-face negotiation creates more intimacy and trust. But we quickly found out that face-to-face communication with a psychopath or an armed criminal is highly dangerous. In fact, the only police negotiators who have ever been killed in a negotiation situation were those who had face-to-face contact. So we dropped the approach altogether except for those situations in which there is absolutely no other way.

There is another reason we don't communicate face-to-face: We don't want to have the other guy see the inner machinations of our team. Think about what the scribe does, for example. If by some chance the bad guy would even surmise that someone is writing down information about him, he might not just feel insulted; he might feel threatened. After all, if you have someone who's barricaded or holding hostages, he's going to be highly paranoid about his safety.

Normally, we prefer to work with the other guy by phone. Either we tap a phone line or drop a phone into the barricaded zone. However we manage it, phone contact is extremely effective. Americans are totally comfortable with the phone. We argue on the phone; we drive and talk on the phone; I've even heard of people who do therapy on the phone. Ironically, in my experience, the bad guys are often more comfortable on the phone than in face-to-face contact because they feel safer at some distance from the police. If they're standing in the same room with you, they feel more exposed.

## What's the most dangerous negotiation situation?

Generally speaking, suicide is the most dangerous situation because it's the most volatile. There's no suffering for people who are threatening suicide. By the time they get this far, they have finished suffering. So unlike criminals who are facing a jail term, suicidal people fear nothing. They're not worried that they might be punished for what they're doing to themselves—or to you. They're just not thinking. And, as we've seen with the suicide bombers in Israel, that makes them some of the most dangerous people we could ever deal with.

Once I had a suicidal ex-police officer who had climbed to the top of the Whitestone Bridge. A lot of people who saw her said, "Aw, she's up there just because she wants the publicity." But I never believed that. It was clear to me that she had emotional problems. Her therapist came to the scene after I had talked her down, and he told the team that we had handled her perfectly because we understood intuitively how dangerous she was. In fact, he told us, she was not only suicidal; she was homicidal. "She wouldn't have hesitated, if you made her mad, to grab one of you and take you over the bridge with her." Incidentally, suicide is the main reason we never allow a priest or a rabbi to talk to a bad guy. We have learned over and over that when people ask for clergy, they are virtually always looking for closure on their lives. It's a prelude to suicide.

## What's the biggest lesson you have learned from your work as a crisis negotiator?

I don't know if it's the biggest lesson, but one very important thing you learn as a negotiator is that if you want to win, you have to help the other guy save face. Look at the people I deal with. They're criminals. They're not book-learned. Yet they're very smart in the sense that they can survive in an environment where most of us cannot, and they also have their own kind of dignity. If you can show these guys a way to maintain their pride while facing a defeat they know is inevitable, they'll go along with what you want.

I learned that lesson early in my negotiation career when I was called in to deal with a situation in Spanish Harlem. It was a hot summer night, and there were 300 or 400 people out on the streets at three o'clock in the morning. A young man with a loaded shotgun had blockaded himself inside a crowded tenement building. He told me he wanted to surrender but couldn't because he'd look weak.

Now, this guy was a parole violator, not a murderer, and so I told him that if he calmed down and let me cuff him, I would make it look as if I had to use force. He put down his gun and behaved like a perfect gentleman until we got to the street, where he started screaming like crazy and raising hell, as we had agreed. While he was doing this, the crowd was chanting "José! José!" in wild approval, and we threw him into the back of the car, sped off, and he broke into a huge grin and said to me, "Hey man, thank you. I really appreciated that." He recognized that I had given him a way out that didn't involve killing people and being killed in turn. I've never forgotten that.